771 update staking guide (#790)
casper-network/docs: source/docs/casper/staking/index.md

tags: ["finance", "staking", "governance"]
---

import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';

# Staking

This page describes key concepts related to the staking process.

A feature of Proof-of-Stake protocols is that token holders can actively participate in the protocol through a mechanism known as **staking** or **delegation**. They can stake their tokens with any validator on a Casper network. Alternatively, it is possible to stake tokens via an exchange or custody provider.

Here are a few common topics related to staking, but we also encourage you to do your own research.

## Staking vs. Delegating {#staking-vs-delegating}

> Node operators stake their tokens to earn the eligibility to propose and approve blocks on the network. They also run and maintain servers connected to the network. If they win a validator slot, they become validators to enable the Proof-of-Stake aspect of the network, a process different from mining tokens. Validators thus earn rewards for participating and for securing the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Node operators stake their tokens to earn eligibility to propose and approve blocks on the network. They also run and maintain servers connected to the network. If they win a validator slot, they become validators and help enable the Proof-of-Stake aspect of the network, a process different from mining tokens. Validators thus earn rewards for participating and for securing the network.
```

Validators define a commission (or delegation rate) that they take in exchange for providing staking services. This commission is represented as a percentage of the rewards that the validator retains for their services.

## Delegation Fees {#delegation-fees}

It is important to know that the cost of the delegation process is approximately 3 CSPR. Ensure you have extra CSPR in your account apart from the amount you are delegating; otherwise, the transaction will fail. For example, if you want to delegate 1000 CSPR, you need to have at least 1003 CSPR in your account.

## Rewards {#rewards}

Validators receive rewards proportional to their stake for securing the network and participating in consensus (by voting and finalizing blocks). Delegators receive a portion of the validator's rewards, proportional to what they delegated, minus the validator's commission (or delegation rate). The rewards earned are reduced if a validator is offline or cannot vote on many blocks. 

There is no precise reward per block. Rewards are split proportionally among stakes within an era and are distributed at the end of each era.

## Selecting a Node for Delegating {#selecting-a-node-for-delegating}

> Selecting a validating node you can trust as a prospective delegator is essential. Block explorers such as [cspr.live](https://cspr.live) provide [validator performance statistics](https://cspr.live/validators), including a performance score, total stake, number of delegators, and fees. Please do your due diligence before staking tokens with a validator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a prospective delegator, it is essential to select a validating node that you can trust. Block explorers such as [cspr.live](https://cspr.live) provide [validator performance statistics](https://cspr.live/validators), including a performance score, total stake, number of delegators, and fees. Please do your due diligence before staking tokens with a validator.
```
